---
layout: post
title: On finally doing my area exam
---

# How I did my area exam

## 0. Picking a topic area
I have "decided" to do my area exam many times before now. Area exams are easy to postpone, because as PhD students it's easy to feel like there's always something more urgent to be working on. Over the years I have repeatedly fallen in to the trap of thinking of myself as a code- and paper-writing machine (which means no papers === I'm a complete failure! This machine is broken! Now I need to write twice as fast to make up for my humiliating failure! Etc.).

But besides the institutional requirement to do it at some point, the main thing giving me forward momentum while working on my exam this time is having a clear idea of what I want to discuss. The area exam talk is about 40 minutes, which is both intimidatingly longer than any talk I've ever given _and_ shorter than I expected. You're not going to be able to sum up, say, all of _neurosymbolic programming_ or _planning for physical HRI_ in 40 minutes, and trying to do so will both waste your time and probably aggravate your latent anxiety disorder. My topic is something that I have at least started some research work in, so I feel I have an okay grasp on what's relevant and what's not -- at least, more so than I ever did before.

My topic is _AI for the facilitation of task handover_, which is (1) honestly still too broad for a 40-minute talk, but I did my best and refined as I went, and (2) an interesting choice because AI is *not* currently used to facilitate task handover (at least, not by anyone but me). The goal of the area exam is to demonstrate your understanding of the state of the art in your chosen area. Because my area is an application domain rather than a technique, and a currently-unrealized application domain at that, my talk will aim to look at the state of the various component technologies that would be applied to this problem space. This (in theory) lets me look at huge areas like LLM summarization and pick out the current papers that are most relevant to my desired application, even if they haven't actually been used for that purpose yet.

## 1. Deciding to do the area exam, and setting a timeline
If you have completed step 0, this should really only be the logistics step. Talk to your advisor to finalize your topic and, with their help, figure out 2 other faculty members that care about that topic and ask them to be on your committee. (This request does not have to be a big to-do -- a fairly short email with a description of your topic and a brief explanation of why you think they would be good to have on your committee given their expertise in XYZ worked just fine for me).

Now all that's left is to schedule that thing. Schedule yourself a solid ~3 weeks where you can focus mostly or completely on the exam, then send out a when2meet or equivalent to your commitee for some 1-2 week period after that. Once you've confirmed everyone's availability, send out that calendar invite, let your labmates know, and book a conference room (at CU you can do this at [CU EMS](https://ems.colorado.edu/), or by contacting the CS front office directly to book a room in ECES or DLC). I'd recommend also scheduling a practice talk a few days beforehand and inviting labmates and/or friends.

In terms of a progress timeline, your major milestones should probably be:
a. Finalizing a paper list with your advisor: end of Week 1 (2 weeks before exam)
b. Sending your advisor your full slide deck for feedback: end of Week 2 (1 week before exam)
c. Writing out your presentation notes, and giving a practice talk to your lab to get more feedback: mid-Week 3 (2+ days before exam)
d. Finishing edits, rehearsing more, and finally giving your talk

If at all possible, schedule multiple meetings with your advisor ahead of time for discussion and feedback, especially for steps (a) and (b).

## 2. Making your outline
It took a fair amount of discussion with my advisor to figure out how to even go about outlining my topic. I had already done a fair amount of reading on all the component areas I wanted to touch on, but didn't know exactly what papers I would be discussion or what structure I would use. After much consideration and scrapped attempts, I ended up taxonomizing the component parts of the task handover problem this way:

A. **forming a state estimate** from input data
B. **acquiring a listener model** for producing model updates
C. **performing model updates** given a difference in mental models

My advisor recommended I pick 2 relevant papers for each of these problem spaces, so 6 papers total. __Note that this is a pretty uncommonly small number of papers__; in most prelim exams I typically see more in the 8-12 range, sometimes more. Again, my situation is somewhat unique in that I'm using a potential application area as a lens to discuss relevant findings. That means that each paper needs to be dicussed in a fair bit of depth, because I need to spend more time connecting it back to the topic at hand.

Even with this smaller quota, making my list was no easy task: mine is an imperfect taxonomy, for one. For another, trying to decide the best papers to talk about for each sub-area was still like trying to find two needles in a very large haystack, with many different types of hay, so you don't know if you should get needles from a representatively broad sample of the hay or just choose some needles from one section of hay so that your needles feel more unified but potentially also more redundant, and some of the hay is behind a paywall so you can't tell if there's a needle in there, and also it's winter in Colorado so it's pitch dark and 0 degrees at 4pm and you want to go home.

At our next meeting my advisor told me to focus my 6-paper lit review on the first two areas, and leave the last section -- "performing model updates" -- as a sort of current-work teaser at the end. This gave me room to discuss 2 more papers in the "listener model acquisition" section.

Lastly, I came up with a few broad thesis statements that I would use to frame each of my papers:
> 1. Recent advances in related areas of AI can be applied to task handover​
> 2. LLMs have made these advances more applicable to real-world communication scenarios 

These are hardly the most controversial or specific theses, but having them was helpful for me in motivating my narrative and I'd highly recommend it. You can fall back on your taxonomy and have something as simple as "each of these N approaches has its own strengths" or "X new technology has enabled us to take this field in Y direction" or "Z is an ongoing problem that remains unsolved in this area, and here's what we know about it / how we have progressed towards solving it." 

# 3. Choosing your papers
For each paper, it's really important that you have a clear idea of what that paper's contributions are, and why your listeners should care about it. There are also other aspects to consider. 
* While you're definitely going to learn new things during this process and step outside of your comfort zone somewhat, you also don't want to be choosing papers that are wildly outside your area of expertise. Remember the goal here is to show off the expertise you've developed in your PhD so far -- leverage what you already know about as much as possible. 
* Relatedly, you might have already done some research work in your topic area, so use this as an opportunity to highlight what prior work has been most relevant to _you_ as a scientist in this area.
* Avoid including papers that are more than a few years old, unless you have good reason (e.g. they were particularly impactful, laid the foundation for future papers you're also going to discuss, etc.). AI moves very fast, and even papers from 2-3 years ago can become quite outdated. Try looking at works that cited that paper instead to see what's been done since.
* Avoid including papers that your committee members authored. This is tempting if they've done relevant work but you're setting yourself up for a potentially uncomfortable Q&A session.

For an example, the final paper list my advisor approved looked like this:

> 1. Obtaining a model of state and environment (i.e., task-relevant state) (n.b.: don’t focus on environment dynamics)
>       - Zhang et al. Hierarchical Cross-Modality Semantic Correlation Learning Model for Multimodal Summarization - a recent-ish (2022) and well-cited paper that had a lot of success on summarization metrics by using semantic correlation learning to combine image and textual data into a single representation and text output. This paper showcases one of many strategies that can be used to extract meaning from multimodal input, making AI better able to recover task relevant information from the world around it.
>           Key point: We can extract meaningful from multiple modalities (for developing a state estimation)
>       - Das, Chernova & Kim, NeurIPS 2023. State2Explanation: Concept-based explanations to benefit agent learning and user understanding. Cited by 24. Learns an embedding model between agent states and associated concept-based explanations and leverages such learned model to (1) inform reward shaping for agent learning, and (2) improve end-user understanding of the agent’s decision making at deployment.
>           Key point: We can create an explanation-grounded internal model that can then be used to generate future explanations
>   
> 2. Obtaining a model of the receiver (i.e. the human model) – giving a model update requires knowing what model you’re updating
> common thread: what does this paper mean in the age of LLMs? What’s the lesson we can transfer into an LLM-powered method?
>       - Zhang & Soh, Large Language models as zero-shot human models for HRI. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10341488
>           Key point: In some situations, we may not need a bespoke human model
>       - Salomons, Akdere & Scassellati. IJCAI 2021. BKT-POMDP: Fast Action Selection for User Skill Modeling over Tasks with Multiple Skills.
>       - Yang et al., Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases 2020. GIKT: A Graph-based interaction model for knowledge tracing. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-67658-2_18
>           Cons: IDK this conference.
>           Pros: 150+ citations so clearly it was impactful. Contrasts with Nicole’s paper above by using a graph convolutional network for knowledge tracing, showcasing a different technical approach that might be more appropriate in some scenarios
>       - Chen, Fong & Soh, MIRROR: Differentiable Deep Social Projection for assistive HRC https://arxiv.org/pdf/2203.02877
>           Key point: Rather than knowledge tracing, this system learns observational & policy residuals in advance, then uses that to predict what human is and is not aware of and what their tendencies are
>   
> 3. Delivering model updates: touching on my current work & a few related works (more briefly)
>       - Chakraboti et al, 2017. Plan Explanations as model reconciliation: Moving beyond explanation as soliloquy. 
>           Key point: proposing computational approaches to various explanation types, given a human model
>       - Tabrez, SPEAR (policy elicitation). SPEAR uses the goal of policy elicitation to determine how best to update the user’s reward function via Boolean algebra and an MIL to optimize for coverage and conciseness.
>           Key point: Builds on the above and showcases a particular approach to model reconciliation via policy elicitation

This took a non-neglible amount of back-and-forth with my advisor to settle on, so talk with them early & often in this process for best results!

# 4. Making your slides
I am by no means a genius at PowerPoint creation, so your mileage may vary, but here's what worked for me.

* _Start with a sketch_ of your presentation's structure. I made a new PowerPoint and literally just wrote titles for each slide to get a sense of what I was going to talk about and where, and put things like "[illustrative figure goes here]" for my future self to figure out.
    * **Intro**: where you give the necessary background on your research area and why people should care about it.
    * **Your outline itself**: Introduce the taxonomy you came up with, if you have one, or at least some way of grouping your papers to give your talk structure.
    * **Thesis**: Some kind of takeaway from all your papers and why you're talking about them. What do you want your listeners to be convinced of by the end of your talk? If they remember 1-2 things, what should they be?
    * **Papers**: Go section by section from your outline, and then paper by paper. For each one, you won't have time to give a full in-depth overview of what the authors did -- instead you'll have only a few slides (maybe only 1, depending on how many papers you have!) to say very specifically what's unique about the paper and how it relates to your thesis. At the end of each section, I recommend having a quick recap slide to summarize the key points from the papers you just discussed.
    * **Conclusion**: This is where you talk about your current work, where you think the field is going & how you want to contribute to it. Where do _you_ fit in in the story you've just told?

* _Build out your intro (and maybe even conclusion) next_, because it will force you to get a super solid grip on the perspective you're taking on each of your papers. (I actually did slides for my papers first, then went back after I wrote my intro and realized I wanted to rework literally all of them. Don't be like me.) This might be where you have to make some figures or illustrations as well, to convey your problem space and outline visually. In your conclusion you might also get to talk about your own work, which is fun.

* _Build out your paper slides_: Honestly the easiest part, but some things to keep in mind:
    * Include citation information where appropriate.
    * Pictures are worth a thousand words -- if the paper has decent figures, use them. But--
    * If you're going to use a figure from the paper, it should either be completely self-explanatory (as in, very simple / just a photograph / etc.) OR you should take at least a second to contextualize it or reference it directly in your talk.
    * Same goes for any math, data tables, etc.: **if it's on your slide, you should speak to it.** (That's a Brad Hayes-ism, for anyone curious.)
    * It's okay if your slides are very text-heavy on the first draft, but eventually you'll want to minimize on-slide text -- you want people listening to you, not reading! Optimize for clarity, spread info across multiple slides if needed.
    * Similarly, complicated figures like system diagrams or tables can be overwhelming and/or distracting for your audience, even if you explain them. Include only the most relevant figures/parts of figures, and consider doing 'progressive reveals' where you un-hide parts of the figure as you discuss it to help listeners follow along. This was suggested to me by a labmate at my practice talk, and now I'm a big progressive reveal fan and I think everyone else should be too. 
    * The key takeaway from each paper should be written out, super explicitly, on the slide -- listeners should be 100% clear on why you care about that paper and they should too.

* _Check your clarity & time_: Do a quick sanity check. Are you going to be able to get through all those slides in 40-45 minutes, without rushing through? As I wrote my presentation, I timed myself doing a quick-and-dirty run through of each section to get a sense of where I was at. My initial pass at my intro took me about 15 minutes(!), so obviously I had some trimming to do. This is also where I condensed text where possible, and moved a lot of text off my slides and into my presentation notes.

Once you have an okay-feeling rough draft, it's time to send the slides to your advisor for feedback & approval.

# 5. Prepping your talk
I relied heavily on the Presenter View feature in PowerPoint (also in Google Slides) so that I could reference my notes on my laptop while I was speaking. I tried to limit these to bullet pointed almost-sentences that still covered everything I wanted to say at each slide. Still, you don't want to be reading off your laptop the whole talk! It took me a few practice runs to get the talk to a half-memorized state, where I could take quick glances at each bullet point to know what to say next. 

(I still definitely read off my screen excessively because my memory fails me under pressure and I dislike eye contact. It's important to know your weaknesses.)

The practice talk I gave for my labmates was incredibly helpful: for the practice, for the feedback they gave, and for the validation of something I'd been working on for weeks. Even though I was nervous to give it, the confidence boost it gave me going into my actual exam was extremely worth it.

# 6. Giving your talk
At this point, your advisor has ok'd your papers and your slides, your labmates have ok'd your talk, you've practiced -- your success is more or less guaranteed. Try not to be nervous! Speak clearly and confidently. Give you (and your audience) time to breathe; have some water nearby and take a sip between slides as needed.

For the closed Q&A session, my committee was not at all concerned with grilling me on technical details (thank god). They were mostly testing my ability to articulate my opinions and decision-making: about what to include in my talk, what is or is not exciting about a particular paper, what the biggest challenges are, and so on. I came out of it feeling pretty good, which was a pleasant surprise.

# 7. The aftermath
I passed! You can view the slides from my talk [here]. If you're a member of HIRO or CAIRO labs at CU you can view a video of it [here].

I'm so grateful to have gotten through this process with my pride mostly intact. I'm also very thankful to my committee for their patience with me -- it took me a long time and a lot of iteration to get the presentation to a state we all were happy with. I wrote this post in hopes that it would help make the process a bit less intimidating for future students. Good luck!